https://www.zeiss.com/microscopy/us/solutions/laboratory-routine/forensic-science-microscope.html
Your Microscopes for Forensic Science Investigations 

your microscopes for forensic science investigations   ×   microscopy   service & support   contact   online shop   resources   blog   you are here:   home   solutions   laboratory routine   forensic science microscope   united states   usa   contact   online shop   resources   blog   service & support   ×   select a country or region   microscopy   service & support   service & support   home   solutions   laboratory routine   forensic science microscope   forensic science   find your product   benefits   fields of application   recommended products   topics   contact us   benefits   fields of application   recommended products   contact us   every contact leaves a trace. working in forensic science, it’s your daily business to analyze these traces finding evidence especially when it relates to a legal case. microscopes are your most important tools in forensic science investigations. precise and reliable instruments, which offer brilliant images, reproducible results and the ability for documentation are your key to successfully examine a case. microscopes in forensic science help you to   investigate the site of a crime and study the cause and time of death   distinguish homicide from suicide, determine the type of weapon used, and establish the identity of the deceased   identify fingerprints and footprints and get trace evidence such as hairs and fibers, dna, or handwriting   forensic science cover a wide range of applications from pathology, anthropology, entomology, toxicology to dna analysis. choose from a complete portfolio of zeiss microscopy techniques to gain criminal evidence in your forensic application.   downloads   forensic science   flyer: taking a new look at forensics   zeiss microscope systems for forensic sciences   pages: 2   file size: 1551 kb   download   microscopic detection of sperm on washed textiles after hy-liter staining   pages: 8   file size: 2636 kb   download   results 1 - 2 of 2   fields of application   gunshot residue analysis   classify and distinguish gunshot residue   trace evidence   prepare, examine and compare details from fibres, paint, hair or glass   recommended products for forensic science   zeiss evo scanning electron microscope   modular sem platform for intuitive operation   zeiss sigma scanning electron microscope   sigma is your field emission sem for high quality imaging and advanced analytical microscopy. the gemini objective lens design combines electrostatic and magnetic fields to maximize optical performance while reducing field influences at the sample to a minimum. sigma’s best-in-class eds geometry increases your analytical productivity, especially on beam sensitive samples. the short analytical working distance of 8.5 mm and a take-off angle of 35°allows you to obtain analytical data at half of the default probe currents and at twice the speed. the high stability of the sigma column provides the means for fast and complete x-ray analysis and mapping. this is due to the fact that placing the detectors closer to the sample facilitates achieving complete shadow-free analytical results. a. with sigma you can reliably detect particles < 0.5 µm in size and distinguish them from the environmental particles.   high quality imaging and advanced analytical microscopy   zeiss axio zoom.v16   axio zoom.v16 is your motorized fluorescence zoom microscope. you profit from a 16x zoom in combination with a high numerical aperture of na 0.25. this zoom microscope achieves a very high numerical aperture in the medium zoom range already: you get superior fluorescence brightness in large object fields. in addition to brightfield, darkfield and oblique illumination, you get an increased contrast brightfield at the touch of a button. with the best mode button, the stereo zoom microscope axio zoom.v16 determines the actual optical state and optimizes transmitted light automatically. save your setting and reload it for your next investigation of trace evidence. you always get reproducible, comparable results.   high quality imaging and advanced analytical microscopy   zeiss axio imager 2 for polarized light   axio imager 2 allows a wide range of applications for forensic analysis and examinations, e.g. failure analysis, gunshot residue, fiber or paint analysis. with the motorized reflector turret, for six or ten push & click filter modules, you can easily work with all the different contrast methods in transmitted or reflected light. the pre-centered bertrand optics allows you to switch easily between orthoscopic and conoscopic observation. due to the motorization and the automated component recognition (acr) you can rely on your microscope settings at all times. save your individual settings and retrieve them effortlessly with a push of a button. due to the ability to use additional correlative microscopy you can transfer your samples to a zeiss electron microscope for further investigations.   perform complex tasks reliably   not all products are available in every country. use of products for medical diagnostic, therapeutic or treatment purposes may be limited by local regulations. contact your local zeiss provider for more information.   about us   download portal   subscribe to newsletter   about zeiss   career   press & media   publisher   legal notice   data protection   