https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forensic_science
Forensic science - Wikipedia

forensic science - wikipedia   forensic science   from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   jump to navigation   jump to search   "forensics" redirects here. for the fields of speech and debate, see   public speaking   and   debate   .   for the german jazz saxophone album by ingrid laubrock, see   forensic (album)   .  for the indian crime thriller film, see   forensic (film)   .   application of science to criminal and civil laws   part of   a series   on   forensic science   physiological   anthropology   biology   bloodstain pattern analysis   dentistry   dna phenotyping   dna profiling   entomology   epidemiology   limnology   medicine   palynology   pathology   podiatry   toxicology   social   psychiatry   psychology   psychotherapy   social work   criminalistics   accounting   body identification   chemistry   colorimetry   facial reconstruction   fingerprint analysis   firearm examination   footwear evidence   forensic arts   profiling   gloveprint analysis   palmprint analysis   questioned document examination   vein matching   forensic geophysics   forensic geology   digital forensics   computer exams   data analysis   database study   malware analysis   mobile devices   network analysis   photography   video analysis   audio analysis   related disciplines   electrical engineering   engineering   fire investigation   fire accelerant detection   fractography   linguistics   materials engineering   polymer engineering   statistics   traffic collision reconstruction   related articles   crime scene   csi effect   perry mason syndrome   pollen calendar   skid mark   trace evidence   use of dna in   forensic entomology   outline   category   v   t   e   forensic science   , also known as   criminalistics   ,   [1]   is the application of   science   to   criminal   and   civil laws   , mainly—on the criminal side—during   criminal investigation   , as governed by the legal standards of   admissible evidence   and   criminal procedure   .   forensic scientists collect, preserve, and analyze scientific   evidence   during the course of an investigation. while some forensic scientists travel to the scene of the crime to collect the evidence themselves, others occupy a laboratory role, performing analysis on objects brought to them by other individuals.   [2]   in addition to their laboratory role, forensic scientists testify as   expert witnesses   in both criminal and civil cases and can work for either the   prosecution   or the defense. while any field could technically be   forensic   , certain sections have developed over time to encompass the majority of forensically related cases.   [3]   forensic science is a combination of two different latin words: forensis and science. the former, forensic, relates to a discussion or examination performed in public. because trials in the ancient world were typically held in public, it carries a strong judicial connotation. the second is science, which is derived from the latin word for 'knowledge' and is today closely tied to the scientific method, a systematic way of acquiring knowledge. taken together forensic science means the use of the scientific methods and processes for crime solving.   contents   1   etymology   2   history   2.1   origins of forensic science and early methods   2.2   development of forensic science   2.3   toxicology   2.4   ballistics   2.5   anthropometry   2.6   fingerprints   2.7   uhlenhuth test   2.8   dna   2.9   maturation   2.10   late 19th – early 20th century figures   2.11   20th century   2.12   21st century   3   subdivisions   4   questionable techniques   5   litigation science   6   demographics   7   media impact   8   controversies   9   forensic science and humanitarian work   10   see also   11   bibliography   12   references   13   external links   etymology   [   edit   ]   the word   forensic   comes from the latin term   , meaning "of or before the forum".   [4]   the history of the term originates from roman times, during which a criminal charge meant presenting the case before a group of public individuals in the   forum   . both the person accused of the crime and the accuser would give speeches based on their sides of the story. the case would be decided in favor of the individual with the best argument and delivery. this origin is the source of the two modern usages of the word   forensic   —as a form of legal evidence; and as a category of public presentation.   in modern use, the term   forensics   in the place of   forensic science   can be considered incorrect, as the term   forensic   is effectively a   synonym   for   legal   or   related to courts   . however, the term is now so closely associated with the scientific field that many dictionaries include the meaning that equates the word   forensics   with   forensic science   .   history   [   edit   ]   this section   needs additional citations for   verification   .   please help   improve this article   by   adding citations to reliable sources   . unsourced material may be challenged and removed.   (   november 2014   )   (   learn how and when to remove this template message   )   origins of forensic science and early methods   [   edit   ]   main article:   forensics in antiquity   the   ancient world   lacked standardized forensic practices, which enabled criminals to escape punishment. criminal investigations and trials relied heavily on forced   confessions   and witness   testimony   . however, ancient sources do contain several accounts of techniques that foreshadow concepts in forensic science developed centuries later.   [5]   the first written account of using   medicine   and   entomology   to solve criminal cases is attributed to the book of   xi yuan lu   (translated as   washing away of wrongs   [6]   [7]   ), written in china in 1248 by   song ci   [8]   during the   song dynasty   .   song ci introduced regulations concerning autopsy reports to court,   [9]   how to protect the evidence in the examining process, and explained why forensic workers must demonstrate impartiality to the public.   [10]   he devised methods for making antiseptic and for promoting the reappearance of hidden injuries to dead bodies and bones (using sunlight and vinegar under a red-oil umbrella);   [11]   for calculating the time of death (allowing for weather and insect activity);   [12]   described how to wash and examine the dead body to ascertain the reason for death.   [13]   at that time the book had described methods for distinguishing between suicide and faked suicide.   [14]   in one of song ci's accounts (   washing away of wrongs   ), the case of a person murdered with a sickle was solved by an investigator who instructed each suspect to bring his sickle to one location. (he realized it was a sickle by testing various blades on an animal carcass and comparing the wounds.) flies, attracted by the smell of blood, eventually gathered on a single sickle. in light of this, the owner of that sickle confessed to the murder. as other  examples, the book also described how to distinguish between a   drowning   (water in the   lungs   ) and   strangulation   (broken neck   cartilage   ), and described evidence from examining corpses to determine if a death was caused by murder, suicide or accident.   [   citation needed   ]   methods from around the world involved saliva and examination of the mouth and tongue to determine innocence or guilt, as a precursor to the   polygraph test   . in ancient india,   [15]   some suspects were made to fill their mouths with dried rice and spit it back out. similarly, in ancient   china   , those accused of a crime would have rice powder placed in their mouths.   [16]   in ancient   middle-eastern   cultures, the accused were made to lick hot metal rods briefly. it is thought that these tests had some validity   [   citation needed   ]   since a guilty person would produce less saliva and thus have a drier mouth; the accused would be considered guilty if rice was sticking to their mouths in abundance or if their tongues were severely burned due to lack of shielding from saliva.   [   citation needed   ]   development of forensic science   [   edit   ]   ambroise paré   's surgical work laid the groundwork for the development of forensic techniques in the following centuries.   in 16th-century europe, medical practitioners in army and university settings began to gather information on the cause and   manner of death   .   ambroise paré   , a french army   surgeon   , systematically studied the effects of violent death on internal organs.   [17]   [18]   two   italian   surgeons, fortunato fidelis and paolo zacchia, laid the foundation of modern   pathology   by studying changes that occurred in the structure of the body as the result of disease.   [19]   in the late 18th century, writings on these topics began to appear. these included   a treatise on forensic medicine and public health   by the french physician   francois immanuele fodéré   [20]   and   the complete system of police medicine   by the german medical expert   johann peter frank   .   [21]   as the rational values of the   enlightenment era   occult   largely ceased to influence the court's decisions. two examples of english forensic science in individual legal proceedings demonstrate the increasing use of   logic   and procedure in criminal investigations at the time. in 1784, in   lancaster   , john toms was tried and convicted for murdering edward culshaw with a   pistol   . when the dead body of culshaw was examined, a pistol wad (crushed paper used to secure powder and balls in the muzzle) found in his head wound matched perfectly with a torn newspaper found in toms's pocket, leading to the conviction.   [22]   in   warwick   1816, a farm laborer was tried and convicted of the murder of a young maidservant. she had been drowned in a shallow pool and bore the marks of violent assault. the police found footprints and an impression from corduroy cloth with a sewn patch in the damp earth near the pool. there were also scattered grains of   wheat   and chaff. the breeches of a farm labourer who had been threshing wheat nearby were examined and corresponded exactly to the impression in the earth near the pool.   [23]   toxicology   [   edit   ]   a method for detecting arsenious oxide, simple   arsenic   , in corpses was devised in 1773 by the swedish chemist,   carl wilhelm scheele   .   [24]   his work was expanded upon, in 1806, by german chemist valentin ross, who learned to detect the poison in the walls of a victim's stomach.   [25]   apparatus for the arsenic test, devised by   james marsh   james marsh   was the first to apply this new science to the art of forensics. he was called by the prosecution in a murder trial to give evidence as a chemist in 1832. the defendant, john bodle, was accused of poisoning his grandfather with arsenic-laced coffee. marsh performed the standard test by mixing a suspected sample with   hydrogen sulfide   and   hydrochloric acid   . while he was able to detect arsenic as yellow   arsenic trisulfide   , when it was shown to the jury it had deteriorated, allowing the suspect to be acquitted due to reasonable doubt.   [26]   annoyed by that, marsh developed a much better test. he combined a sample containing arsenic with   sulfuric acid   and arsenic-free   zinc   , resulting in   arsine   gas. the gas was ignited, and it decomposed to pure metallic arsenic, which, when passed to a cold surface, would appear as a silvery-black deposit.   [27]   so sensitive was the test, known formally as the   marsh test   , that it could detect as little as one-fiftieth of a milligram of arsenic. he first described this test in   the edinburgh philosophical journal   in 1836.   [28]   ballistics   [   edit   ]   main article:   forensic firearm examination   henry goddard at   scotland yard   pioneered the use of bullet comparison in 1835. he noticed a flaw in the bullet that killed the victim and was able to trace this back to the mold that was used in the manufacturing process.   [29]   anthropometry   [   edit   ]   frontispiece   from   bertillon's   identification anthropométrique   (1893), demonstrating the measurements needed for his anthropometric identification system   the french police officer   alphonse bertillon   was the first to apply the anthropological technique of   anthropometry   to law enforcement, thereby creating an identification system based on physical measurements. before that time, criminals could be identified only by name or photograph.   [30]   [31]   dissatisfied with the   ad hoc   methods used to identify captured criminals in france in the 1870s, he began his work on developing a reliable system of anthropometrics for human classification.   [32]   bertillon created many other   forensics   techniques, including   forensic document examination   , the use of   galvanoplastic   compounds to preserve   footprints   ,   ballistics   , and the   dynamometer   , used to determine the degree of force used in   breaking and entering   . although his central methods were soon to be supplanted by   fingerprinting   , "his other contributions like the   mug shot   and the systematization of crime-scene photography remain in place to this day."   [31]   fingerprints   [   edit   ]   sir   william herschel   was one of the first to advocate the use of fingerprinting in the identification of criminal suspects. while working for the   indian civil service   , he began to use thumbprints on documents as a security measure to prevent the then-rampant repudiation of signatures in 1858.   [33]   fingerprints taken by   william herschel   1859/60   in 1877 at hooghly (near kolkata), herschel instituted the use of fingerprints on contracts and deeds, and he registered government pensioners' fingerprints to prevent the collection of money by relatives after a pensioner's death.   [34]   in 1880, dr.   henry faulds   , a scottish surgeon in a   tokyo   hospital, published his first paper on the subject in the scientific journal   nature   , discussing the usefulness of fingerprints for identification and proposing a method to record them with printing ink. he established their first classification and was also the first to identify fingerprints left on a vial.   [35]   returning to the uk in 1886, he offered the concept to the   metropolitan police   in london, but it was dismissed at that time.   [36]   faulds wrote to   charles darwin   with a description of his method, but, too old and ill to work on it, darwin gave the information to his cousin,   francis galton   , who was interested in anthropology. having been thus inspired to study fingerprints for ten years, galton published a detailed statistical model of fingerprint analysis and identification and encouraged its use in forensic science in his book   finger prints   . he had calculated that the chance of a "false positive" (two different individuals having the same fingerprints) was about 1 in 64 billion.   [37]   women clerical employees of the   la police department   getting   fingerprinted   and photographed in 1928   juan vucetich   , an argentine chief police officer, created the first method of recording the fingerprints of individuals on file. in 1892, after studying galton's pattern types, vucetich set up the world's first fingerprint bureau. in that same year, francisca rojas of   necochea   was found in a house with neck injuries whilst her two sons were found dead with their throats cut. rojas accused a neighbour, but despite brutal interrogation, this neighbour would not confess to the crimes. inspector alvarez, a colleague of vucetich, went to the scene and found a bloody thumb mark on a door. when it was compared with rojas' prints, it was found to be identical with her right thumb. she then confessed to the murder of her sons.   a fingerprint bureau was established in calcutta (   kolkata   ), india, in 1897, after the council of the governor general approved a committee report that fingerprints should be used for the classification of criminal records. working in the calcutta anthropometric bureau, before it became the fingerprint bureau, were   azizul haque   and   hem chandra bose   . haque and bose were indian fingerprint experts who have been credited with the primary development of a fingerprint classification system eventually named after their supervisor,   sir edward richard henry   .   [38]   [39]   the   henry classification system   , co-devised by haque and bose, was accepted in england and wales when the first united kingdom fingerprint bureau was founded in   scotland yard   , the   metropolitan police   headquarters, london, in 1901. sir edward richard henry subsequently achieved improvements in dactyloscopy.   [   citation needed   ]   in the united states, dr. henry p. deforrest used fingerprinting in the   new york civil service   in 1902, and by december 1905,   new york city police department   deputy commissioner joseph a. faurot, an expert in the   bertillon   system and a fingerprint advocate at police headquarters, introduced the fingerprinting of criminals to the united states.   [40]   uhlenhuth test   [   edit   ]   the   uhlenhuth test   , or the antigen–antibody   precipitin   test for species, was invented by   paul uhlenhuth   in 1901 and could distinguish human   blood   from animal blood, based on the discovery that the blood of different species had one or more characteristic proteins. the test represented a major breakthrough and came to have tremendous importance in forensic science.   [41]   the test was further refined for forensic use by the swiss chemist   maurice müller   in the 1960s.   [42]   dna   [   edit   ]   forensic   dna analysis   was first used in 1984. it was developed by sir   alec jeffreys   , who realized that variation in the genetic sequence could be used to identify individuals and to tell individuals apart from one another. the first application of dna profiles was used by jefferys in a double murder mystery in the small english town of   narborough, leicestershire   , in 1985. a 15-year-old school girl by the name of lynda mann was raped and murdered in carlton hayes psychiatric hospital. the police did not find a suspect but were able to obtain a semen sample.   in 1986, dawn ashworth, 15 years old, was also raped and strangled in the nearby village of   enderby   . forensic evidence showed that both killers had the same blood type. richard buckland became the suspect because he worked at carlton hayes psychiatric hospital, had been spotted near dawn ashworth's murder scene and knew unreleased details about the body. he later confessed to dawn's murder but not lynda's.  jefferys was brought into the case to analyze the semen samples. he concluded that there was no match between the samples and buckland, who became the first person to be exonerated using dna. jefferys confirmed that the dna profiles were identical for the two murder semen samples. to find the perpetrator, dna samples from the entire male population, more than 4,000 aged from 17 to 34, of the town were collected. they all were compared to semen samples from the crime.  a friend of   colin pitchfork   was heard saying that he had given his sample to the police claiming to be colin. colin pitchfork was arrested in 1987 and it was found that his dna profile matched the semen samples from the murder.   because of this case, dna databases were developed. there is the national (fbi) and international databases as well as the european countries (enfsi : european network of forensic science institutes). these searchable databases are used to match crime scene dna profiles to those already in a database.   [43]   maturation   [   edit   ]   police brought to bear the latest techniques of forensic science in their attempts to identify and capture the serial killer   jack the ripper   .   by the turn of the 20th century, the science of forensics had become largely established in the sphere of criminal investigation. scientific and surgical investigation was widely employed by the   metropolitan police   during their pursuit of the mysterious   jack the ripper   , who had killed a number of   prostitutes   in the 1880s. this case is a watershed in the application of forensic science. large teams of policemen conducted house-to-house inquiries throughout whitechapel. forensic material was collected and examined. suspects were identified, traced and either examined more closely or eliminated from the inquiry. police work follows the same pattern today.   [44]   over 2000 people were interviewed, "upwards of 300" people were investigated, and 80 people were detained.   [45]   the investigation was initially conducted by the   criminal investigation department   (cid), headed by detective inspector   edmund reid   . later, detective inspectors   frederick abberline   ,   henry moore   , and   walter andrews   were sent from central office at   scotland yard   to assist. initially, butchers, surgeons and physicians were suspected because of the manner of the mutilations. the alibis of local butchers and slaughterers were investigated, with the result that they were eliminated from the inquiry.   [46]   some contemporary figures thought the pattern of the murders indicated that the culprit was a butcher or cattle drover on one of the cattle boats that plied between london and mainland europe. whitechapel was close to the   london docks   ,   [47]   and usually such boats docked on thursday or friday and departed on saturday or sunday.   [48]   the cattle boats were examined, but the dates of the murders did not coincide with a single boat's movements, and the transfer of a crewman between boats was also ruled out.   [49]   at the end of october, robert anderson asked police surgeon   thomas bond   to give his opinion on the extent of the murderer's surgical skill and knowledge.   [50]   the opinion offered by bond on the character of the "whitechapel murderer" is the earliest surviving   offender profile   .   [51]   bond's assessment was based on his own examination of the most extensively mutilated victim and the   post mortem   notes from the four previous canonical murders.   [52]   in his opinion the killer must have been a man of solitary habits, subject to "periodical attacks of homicidal and erotic   mania   ", with the character of the mutilations possibly indicating "   satyriasis   ".   [52]   bond also stated that "the homicidal impulse may have developed from a revengeful or brooding condition of the mind, or that religious mania may have been the original disease but i do not think either hypothesis is likely".   [52]   the popular fictional character   sherlock holmes   was in many ways ahead of his time in his use of forensic analysis.   handbook for coroners, police officials, military policemen   was written by the   austrian   criminal jurist   hans gross   in 1893, and is generally acknowledged as the birth of the field of criminalistics. the work combined in one system fields of knowledge that had not been previously integrated, such as psychology and physical science, and which could be successfully used against crime. gross adapted some fields to the needs of criminal investigation, such as   crime scene photography   . he went on to found the institute of criminalistics in 1912, as part of the university of graz' law school. this institute was followed by many similar institutes all over the world.   [53]   in 1909,   archibald reiss   founded the   institut de police scientifique   of the   university of lausanne (unil)   , the first school of forensic science in the world. dr.   edmond locard   , became known as the "   sherlock holmes   of   france   ". he formulated the basic principle of forensic science: "every contact leaves a trace", which became known as   locard's exchange principle   . in 1910, he founded what may have been the first criminal laboratory in the world, after persuading the police department of   lyon   (france) to give him two attic rooms and two assistants.   [54]   symbolic of the new found prestige of forensics and the use of reasoning in detective work was the popularity of the fictional character   sherlock holmes   , written by   arthur conan doyle   in the late 19th century. he remains a great inspiration for forensic science, especially for the way his acute study of a crime scene yielded small clues as to the precise sequence of events. he made great use of   trace evidence   such as shoe and tire impressions, as well as fingerprints,   ballistics   and   handwriting analysis   , now known as   questioned document examination   .   [55]   such evidence is used to test theories conceived by the police, for example, or by the investigator himself.   [56]   all of the techniques advocated by holmes later became reality, but were generally in their infancy at the time conan doyle was writing. in many of his reported cases, holmes frequently complains of the way the crime scene has been contaminated by others, especially by the police, emphasising the critical importance of maintaining its integrity, a now well-known feature of crime scene examination. he used   analytical chemistry   for   blood residue   analysis as well as   toxicology   examination and determination for poisons. he used   ballistics   by measuring bullet   calibres   and matching them with a suspected murder weapon.   [57]   late 19th – early 20th century figures   [   edit   ]   hans gross applied scientific methods to crime scenes and was responsible for the birth of criminalistics.   edmond locard   expanded on gross' work with locard's exchange principle which stated "whenever two objects come into contact with one another, materials are exchanged between them". this means that every contact by a criminal leaves a trace.   alexander lacassagne, who taught locard, produced autopsy standards on actual forensic cases.   alphonse bertillon was a french criminologist and founder of anthropometry (scientific study of measurements and proportions of the human body). he used anthropometry for identification, stating that, since each individual is unique, by measuring aspects of physical difference there could be a personal identification system. he created the bertillon system around 1879, a way of identifying criminals and citizens by measuring 20 parts of the body. in 1884, over 240 repeat offenders were caught using the bertillon system, but the system was largely superseded by fingerprinting.   frances glessner lee, known as "the mother of forensic science",   [58]   was instrumental in the development of forensic science in the us. she lobbied to have coroners replaced by medical professionals, endowed the harvard associates in police science, and conducted many seminars to educate homicide investigators. she also created the   nutshell studies of unexplained death   , intricate crime scene dioramas used to train investigators, which are still in use today.   20th century   [   edit   ]   alec jeffreys   invented the   dna profiling   technique in 1984.   later in the 20th century several british pathologists,   mikey rochman   ,   francis camps   ,   sydney smith   and   keith simpson   pioneered new forensic science methods.   alec jeffreys   pioneered the use of   dna profiling   in forensic science in 1984. he realized the scope of dna fingerprinting, which uses variations in the   genetic code   to identify individuals. the method has since become important in forensic science to assist police detective work, and it has also proved useful in resolving paternity and immigration disputes.   [59]   dna fingerprinting was first used as a police forensic test to identify the rapist and killer of two teenagers, lynda mann and dawn ashworth, who were both murdered in   narborough, leicestershire   , in 1983 and 1986 respectively.   colin pitchfork   was identified and convicted of murder after samples taken from him matched   semen   samples taken from the two dead girls.   forensic science has been fostered by a number of national and international forensic science learned bodies including the   chartered society of forensic sciences   ,   [60]   (founded 1959), then known as the forensic science society, publisher of   science & justice   ;.   [61]   american academy of forensic sciences   (founded 1948), publishers of the   journal of forensic sciences   ;   [62]   the   canadian society of forensic science   (founded 1953), publishers of the   journal of the canadian society of forensic science   ; the british academy of forensic sciences   [63]   (founded 1960), publishers of   medicine, science and the law   ,   [64]   the   australian academy of forensic sciences   (founded 1967), publishers of the   australian journal of forensic sciences   , and the   european network of forensic science institutes   (founded 1995).   21st century   [   edit   ]   in the past decade, documenting forensics scenes has become more efficient. forensic scientists have started using laser scanners, drones and photogrammetry to obtain 3d point clouds of accidents or crime scenes. reconstruction of an accident scene on a highway using drones involves data acquisition time of only 10–20 minutes and can be performed without shutting down traffic. the results are not just accurate, in centimeters, for measurement to be presented in court but also easy to digitally preserve in the long term.   [65]   now, in the 21st century, much of forensic science's future is up for discussion. the   national institute of standards and technology   (nist) has offered the community some guidelines upon which the science should build. nist recommends that forensic science rethinks its system. if local laboratories abide by these guidelines, 21st century forensics will be dramatically different from what it has been up till now. one of the more recent additions by nist is a document called nistir-7941, titled "forensic science laboratories: handbook for facility planning, design, construction, and relocation". the handbook provides a clear blueprint for approaching forensic science. the details even include what type of staff should be hired for certain positions.   [66]   subdivisions   [   edit   ]   agents of the   united states army criminal investigation division   investigate a crime scene.   police forensic investigation in   ashton-under-lyne   , england, using a tent to protect the crime scene   art forensics   concerns the art authentication cases to help research the work's authenticity. art authentication methods are used to detect and identify forgery, faking and copying of art works, e.g. paintings.   bloodstain pattern analysis   is the scientific examination of blood spatter patterns found at a crime scene to reconstruct the events of the crime.   comparative forensics   is the application of visual comparison techniques do verify similarity of physical evidence. this includes fingerprint analysis, toolmark analysis, and ballistic analysis.   computational forensics   concerns the development of algorithms and software to assist forensic examination.   criminalistics   is the application of various sciences to answer questions relating to examination and comparison of   biological evidence   ,   trace evidence   , impression evidence (such as   fingerprints   ,   footwear impressions   , and   tire tracks   ),   controlled substances   ,   ballistics   , firearm and toolmark examination, and other evidence in criminal investigations. in typical circumstances evidence is processed in a   crime lab   .   digital forensics   is the application of proven scientific methods and techniques in order to recover data from electronic / digital media. digital forensic specialists work in the field as well as in the lab.   ear print analysis   is used as a means of forensic identification intended as an identification tool similar to fingerprinting. an earprint is a two-dimensional reproduction of the parts of the outer ear that have touched a specific surface (most commonly the helix, antihelix, tragus and antitragus).   election forensics   is the use of statistics to determine if election results are normal or abnormal.   forensic accounting   is the study and interpretation of accounting evidence.   forensic aerial photography   is the study and interpretation of aerial photographic evidence.   forensic anthropology   is the application of   physical anthropology   in a legal setting, usually for the recovery and identification of   skeletonized   human remains.   forensic archaeology   is the application of a combination of   archaeological   techniques and forensic science, typically in law enforcement.   forensic astronomy   uses methods from   astronomy   to determine past celestial constellations for forensic purposes.   forensic botany   is the study of plant life in order to gain information regarding possible crimes.   forensic chemistry   is the study of detection and identification of   illicit drugs   , accelerants used in   arson   cases, explosive and   gunshot residue   .   forensic dactyloscopy   is the study of   fingerprints   .   forensic document examination or   questioned document examination   answers questions about a disputed document using a variety of scientific processes and methods. many examinations involve a comparison of the questioned document, or components of the document, with a set of known standards. the most common type of examination involves handwriting, whereby the examiner tries to address concerns about potential authorship.   forensic dna analysis   takes advantage of the uniqueness of an individual's dna to answer forensic questions such as   paternity/maternity testing   and placing a suspect at a crime scene, e.g. in a   rape investigation   .   forensic engineering   is the scientific examination and analysis of structures and products relating to their failure or cause of damage.   forensic entomology   deals with the examination of   insects   in, on and around human remains to assist in determination of time or location of death. it is also possible to determine if the body was moved after death using entomology.   forensic geology   deals with   trace evidence   in the form of soils, minerals and petroleum.   forensic geomorphology is the study of the ground surface to look for potential location(s) of buried object(s).   [67]   forensic geophysics   is the application of geophysical techniques such as radar for detecting objects hidden underground   [68]   or underwater.   [69]   forensic intelligence   process starts with the collection of data and ends with the integration of results within into the analysis of crimes under investigation.   [70]   forensic interviews   are conducted using the science of professionally using expertise to conduct a variety of investigative interviews with victims, witnesses, suspects or other sources to determine the facts regarding suspicions, allegations or specific incidents in either public or private sector settings.   forensic limnology   is the analysis of evidence collected from crime scenes in or around fresh-water sources. examination of biological organisms, in particular   diatoms   , can be useful in connecting suspects with victims.   forensic linguistics   deals with issues in the legal system that requires linguistic expertise.   forensic meteorology   is a site-specific analysis of past weather conditions for a point of loss.   forensic microbiology   is the study of the   necrobiome   .   forensic nursing   is the application of   nursing   sciences to abusive crimes, like child abuse, or sexual abuse. categorization of wounds and traumas, collection of bodily fluids and emotional support are some of the duties of forensic nurses.   forensic odontology   is the study of the uniqueness of dentition, better known as the study of teeth.   forensic optometry   is the study of glasses and other eyewear relating to crime scenes and criminal investigations.   forensic pathology   is a field in which the principles of   medicine   and   pathology   are applied to determine a cause of death or injury in the context of a legal inquiry.   forensic podiatry   is an application of the study of feet   footprint   or footwear and their traces to analyze scene of crime and to establish personal identity in forensic examinations.   forensic psychiatry   is a specialized branch of   psychiatry   as applied to and based on scientific   criminology   .   forensic psychology   is the study of the mind of an individual, using forensic methods. usually it determines the circumstances behind a criminal's behavior.   forensic seismology   is the study of techniques to distinguish the seismic signals generated by underground nuclear explosions from those generated by earthquakes.   forensic serology   is the study of the body fluids.   [71]   forensic social work   is the specialist study of   social work   theories and their applications to a clinical, criminal justice or   psychiatric   setting. practitioners of forensic social work connected with the   criminal justice system   are often termed social supervisors, whilst the remaining use the interchangeable titles   forensic social worker   ,   approved mental health professional   or forensic practitioner and they conduct specialist assessments of risk, care planning and act as an officer of the court.   forensic toxicology   is the study of the effect of   drugs   and   poisons   on/in the human body.   forensic video analysis   is the scientific examination, comparison and evaluation of video in legal matters.   mobile device forensics   is the scientific examination and evaluation of evidence found in mobile phones, e.g. call history and deleted sms, and includes sim card forensics.   trace evidence   analysis is the analysis and comparison of trace evidence including glass, paint, fibres and hair (e.g., using   micro-spectrophotometry   ).   wildlife forensic science   applies a range of scientific disciplines to legal cases involving non-human biological evidence, to solve crimes such as poaching,   animal abuse   , and trade in endangered species.   questionable techniques   [   edit   ]   some forensic techniques, believed to be scientifically sound at the time they were used, have turned out later to have much less scientific merit or none.   [72]   some such techniques include:   comparative bullet-lead analysis   was used by the fbi for over four decades, starting with the   john f. kennedy assassination   in 1963.  the theory was that each batch of   ammunition   possessed a chemical makeup so distinct that a bullet could be traced back to a particular batch or even a specific box.  internal studies and an outside study by the   national academy of sciences   found that the technique was unreliable due to improper interpretation, and the fbi abandoned the test in 2005.   [73]   forensic dentistry   has come under fire:  in at least three cases bite-mark evidence has been used to convict people of murder who were later freed by dna evidence.   [74]   a 1999 study by a member of the american board of forensic odontology found a 63 percent rate of false identifications and is commonly referenced within online news stories and conspiracy websites.   [75]   [76]   the study was based on an informal workshop during an abfo meeting, which many members did not consider a valid scientific setting.   [77]   by the late 2000s, scientists were able to show that it is possible to fabricate dna evidence, thus "undermining the credibility of what has been considered the gold standard of proof in criminal cases".   [78]   litigation science   [   edit   ]   litigation science   describes analysis or data developed or produced   expressly   for use in a trial versus those produced in the course of independent research. this distinction was made by the   u.s. 9th circuit court of appeals   when evaluating the admissibility of experts.   [79]   this uses   demonstrative evidence   , which is evidence created in preparation of trial by   attorneys   or   paralegals   .   demographics   [   edit   ]   in the united states there are over 14,500 forensic science technicians, as of 2014.   [80]   media impact   [   edit   ]   real-life crime scene investigators and forensic scientists warn that popular television shows do not give a realistic picture of the work, often wildly distorting its nature, and exaggerating the ease, speed, effectiveness, drama, glamour, influence and comfort level of their jobs—which they describe as far more mundane, tedious and boring.   [81]   [82]   some claim these modern tv shows have changed individuals' expectations of forensic science, sometimes unrealistically—an influence termed the "   csi effect   ".   [83]   [84]   further, research has suggested that public misperceptions about criminal forensics can create, in the mind of a   juror   , unrealistic expectations of forensic evidence—which they expect to see before convicting—implicitly biasing the juror towards the defendant. citing the "csi effect," at least one researcher has suggested screening jurors for their level of influence from such tv programs   [84]   controversies   [   edit   ]   questions about certain areas of forensic science, such as fingerprint evidence and the assumptions behind these disciplines have been brought to light in some publications   [85]   [86]   including the   new york post   .   [87]   the article stated that "no one has proved even the basic assumption: that everyone's fingerprint is unique."   [87]   the article also stated that "now such assumptions are being questioned—and with it may come a radical change in how forensic science is used by police departments and prosecutors."   [87]   law professor jessica gabel said on nova that forensic science "lacks the rigors, the standards, the quality controls and procedures that we find, usually, in science."   [88]   in the us, on 25 june 2009, the supreme court issued a 5-to-4 decision in   melendez-diaz v. massachusetts   stating that crime laboratory reports may not be used against criminal defendants at trial unless the analysts responsible for creating them give testimony and subject themselves to cross-examination.  the supreme court cited the national academies report   strengthening forensic science in the united states   [89]   in their decision. writing for the majority, justice   antonin scalia   referred to the   national research council   report in his assertion that "forensic evidence is not uniquely immune from the risk of manipulation."   in the us, another area of forensic science that has come under question in recent years is the lack of laws requiring the accreditation of forensic labs.  some states require accreditation, but some states do not.  because of this, many labs have been caught performing very poor work resulting in false convictions or acquittals.  for example, it was discovered after an audit of the houston police department in 2002 that the lab had fabricated evidence which led george rodriguez being convicted of raping a fourteen-year-old girl.   [90]   the former director of the lab, when asked, said that the total number of cases that could have been contaminated by improper work could be in the range of 5,000 to 10,000.   [90]   this could have been avoided if the lab had been accredited by organizations such as ascld/lab, which require crime labs to undergo rigorous assessments to show that they are able to perform multiple tests accurately.  once they become accredited, they are periodically re-evaluated to ensure that the lab is still functioning at its best.   [91]   periodic evaluations of a lab's performance by an independent organization will help to prevent scandals from occurring in forensic science laboratories.   although forensic science has greatly enhanced the investigator's ability to solve crimes, it has limitations and must be scrutinized in and out of the courtroom to avoid the occurrence of wrongful convictions.   [92]   the innocence project data base of dna exonerations shows that many wrongful convictions contained forensic science errors <   https://innocenceproject.org/   >. as indicated by the national academy of sciences (2009) report cited earlier, strengthening forensic sciences, part of the problem is that many traditional forensic sciences have never been empirically validated; and part of the problem is that all examiners are subject to forensic confirmation biases and should be shielded from contextual information not relevant to the judgment they make.   many studies have discovered a difference in rape-related injuries reporting based on race, with white victims reporting a higher frequency of injuries than black victims.   [93]   however, since current forensic examination techniques may not be sensitive to all injuries across a range of skin colors, more research needs to be conducted to understand if this trend is due to skin confounding healthcare providers when examining injuries or if darker skin extends a protective element.   [93]   in clinical practice, for patients with darker skin, one study recommends that attention must be paid to the thighs, labia majora, posterior fourchette and   fossa navicularis   , so that no rape-related injuries are missed upon close examination.   [93]   forensic science and humanitarian work   [   edit   ]   the   international committee of the red cross   (icrc) uses forensic science for humanitarian purposes to clarify the fate of missing persons after armed conflict, disasters or migration,   [94]   and is one of the services related to   restoring family links   and missing persons. knowing what has happened to a missing relative can often make it easier to proceed with the grieving process and move on with life for families of missing persons.   forensic science is used by various other organizations to clarify the fate and whereabouts of persons who have gone missing. examples include the ngo   argentine forensic anthropology team   , working to clarify the fate of people who disappeared during the period of the 1976–1983 military dictatorship. the   international commission on missing persons   (icmp) uses forensic science to find missing persons,   [95]   for example after the conflicts in the balkans.   [96]   recognising the role of forensic science for humanitarian purposes, as well as the importance of forensic investigations in fulfilling the state's responsibilities to investigate human rights violations, a group of experts in the late-1980s devised a un manual on the prevention and investigation of extra-legal, arbitrary and summary executions, which became known as the   minnesota protocol   . this document was revised and re-published by the   office of the high commissioner for human rights   in 2016.   [97]   see also   [   edit   ]   law portal   science portal   american academy of forensic sciences   archibald reiss   , founder of the first forensic school in the world at the   university of lausanne   (1909)   association of firearm and tool mark examiners   australian academy of forensic sciences   ballistic fingerprinting   bloodstain pattern analysis   canadian identification society   canadian society of forensic science   computer forensics   crime   crime science   computational forensics   diplomatics   (forensic paleography)   edmond locard   , founder of the first forensic   laboratory   in the world (1910)   epigenetics in forensic science   evidence packaging   fingerprint   footprints   forensic accounting   forensic animation   forensic anthropology   forensic biology   forensic chemistry   forensic economics   forensic engineering   forensic entomology   forensic facial reconstruction   forensic genetics   forensic identification   forensic linguistics   forensic materials engineering   forensic photography   forensic polymer engineering   forensic profiling   forensic psychiatry   forensic psychology   forensic seismology   forensic social work   forensic video analysis   glove prints   history of forensic photography   international association for identification   marine forensics   minnesota protocol   offender profiling   outline of forensic science   questioned document examination   retrospective diagnosis   rsid   scenes of crime officer   sherlock holmes   skid mark   trace evidence   profiling (information science)   university of florida forensic science distance education program   wildlife forensic science   wilfrid derome   , founder of the first forensic   laboratory   in north america (1914)   bibliography   [   edit   ]   anil aggrawal's internet journal of forensic medicine and toxicology   .   forensic magazine   –   forensicmag.com   .   forensic science communications   , an open access journal of the   fbi   .   forensic sciences international   – an international journal dedicated to the applications of medicine and science in the administration of justice –   issn   0379-0738   –   elsevier   international journal of digital crime and forensics   "the real csi"   ,   pbs   frontline   documentary, 17 april 2012.   baden, michael; roach, marion.   dead reckoning: the new science of catching killers   , simon & schuster, 2001.   isbn   0-684-86758-3   .   bartos, leah,   "no forensic background? no problem"   ,   propublica   , 17 april 2012.   guatelli-steinberg, debbie; mitchell, john c.   structure magazine no. 40, "repliset: high resolution impressions of the teeth of human ancestors"   .   haag, michael g.; haag, lucien c. (2011).   shooting incident reconstruction: second edition   . new york: academic press.   isbn   978-0-12-382241-3   .   holt, cynthia.   guide to information sources in the forensic sciences   libraries unlimited, 2006.   isbn   1-59158-221-0   .   jamieson, allan; moenssens, andre (eds).   wiley encyclopedia of forensic science   john wiley & sons ltd, 2009.   isbn   978-0-470-01826-2   .   online version   .   kind, stuart; overman, michael.   science against crime   doubleday, 1972.   isbn   0-385-09249-0   .   lewis, peter rhys; gagg colin; reynolds, ken.   forensic materials engineering: case studies   crc press   , 2004.   nickell, joe; fischer, john f.   crime science: methods of forensic detection   ,   university press of kentucky   , 1999.   isbn   0-8131-2091-8   .   owen, d. (2000).   hidden evidence: the story of forensic science and how it helped to solve 40 of the world's toughest crimes   quintet publishing, london.   isbn   1-86155-278-5   .   quinche, nicolas, and margot, pierre, "coulier, paul-jean (1824–1890): a precursor in the history of fingermark detection and their potential use for identifying their source (1863)",   journal of forensic identification   (californie), 60 (2), march–april 2010, pp. 129–134.   silverman, mike; thompson, tony.   written in blood: a history of forensic science   . 2014.   stanton g (2003).  sf norton (ed.).   "underwater crime scene investigations (ucsi), a new paradigm"   .   diving for science... 2003   . proceedings of the american academy of underwater sciences (22nd annual scientific diving symposium). archived from   the original   on 27 july 2011   . retrieved   18 june   2008   .   starr, douglas (2011).   the killer of little shepherds: a true crime story and the birth of forensic science   .   isbn   978-0307279088   .   references   [   edit   ]   ^   https://study.com/articles/criminology_vs_criminalistics_whats_the_difference.html   ^   "job description for forensic laboratory scientists"   .   crime scene investigator edu   .   archived   from the original on 6 september 2015   . retrieved   28 august   2015   .   ^   "sections"   .   american academy of forensic sciences   . 27 august 2015. archived from   the original   on 30 august 2015   . retrieved   28 august   2015   .   ^   shorter oxford english dictionary   (6th ed.), oxford university press, 2007,   isbn   978-0-19-920687-2   ^   schafer, elizabeth d. (2008). "ancient science and forensics".  in ayn embar-seddon; allan d. pass (eds.).   forensic science   . salem press. p.   40   .   isbn   978-1-58765-423-7   .   ^   "forensics timeline"   . cbsnews.com.   archived   from the original on 29 june 2011   . retrieved   20 december   2011   .   ^   a brief background of forensic science   archived   16 december 2009 at the   wayback machine   ^   song, ci, and brian e. mcknight.   the washing away of wrongs: forensic medicine in thirteenth-century china   . ann arbor: center for chinese studies, u of michigan, 1981. print. p. 3.   ^   song, ci, and brian e. mcknight.   the washing away of wrongs: forensic medicine in thirteenth-century china   . ann arbor: center for chinese studies, u of michigan, 1981. print. p. 161.   ^   song, ci, and brian e. mcknight.   the washing away of wrongs: forensic medicine in thirteenth-century china   . ann arbor: center for chinese studies, u of michigan, 1981. print. pp. 76–82.   ^   song, ci, and brian e. mcknight.   the washing away of wrongs: forensic medicine in thirteenth-century china   . ann arbor: center for chinese studies, u of michigan, 1981. print. p. 95.   ^   song, ci, and brian e. mcknight. the washing away of wrongs: forensic medicine in thirteenth-century china. ann arbor: center for chinese studies, u of michigan, 1981. print. p 86.   ^   song, ci, and brian e. mcknight.   the washing away of wrongs: forensic medicine in thirteenth-century china   . ann arbor: center for chinese studies, u of michigan, 1981. print. p. 87.   ^   song, ci, and brian e. mcknight.   the washing away of wrongs: forensic medicine in thirteenth-century china   . ann arbor: center for chinese studies, u of michigan, 1981. print. pp. 79–85.   ^   parmeshwaranand, swami (2003).   . new delhi: sarup & sons. p. 499.   isbn   8176253650   .   ^   mccrie, robert d. "general managerial fundamentals and competencies".   security operations management   . 1st ed. amsterdam: butterworth-heinemann/elsevier, 2007. 93. print.   ^   kelly, jack (27 april 2009).   gunpowder: alchemy, bombards, and pyrotechnics: the history of the explosive ...   new york: basic books. p. 79.   isbn   978-0465037186   .   archived   from the original on 23 july 2016.   ^   porter, roy; lorraine daston; katharine park.   the cambridge history of science: volume 3, early modern science   . p. 805.   ^   suter, patricia; russell d. earnest; corinne p. earnest (2010).   the hanging of susanna cox: the true story of pennsylvania's most notorious infanticide and the legend that kept it alive   . mechanicsberg: stackpole books. p. 20.   isbn   9780811705608   .   ^   madea, burkhard (4 march 2014).   handbook of forensic medicine   . sussex: wiley blackwell. p. 10.   isbn   9780470979990   .   archived   from the original on 5 may 2016.   ^   lindemann, mary (28 october 1999).   medicine and society in early modern europe   . cambridge: university of cambridge. p. 135.   isbn   0521412544   .   ^   mccrery, nigel (29 august 2013).   silent witnesses   . london: random house books. p. 51.   isbn   9781847946836   .   archived   from the original on 13 may 2016.   ^   kind s, overman m (1972).   science against crime   . new york: doubleday. pp.   12–13   .   isbn   0-385-09249-0   .   ^   bell, suzanne (october 2008).   drugs, poisons, and chemistry   . new york: facts on file. p. 8.   isbn   978-0816055104   .   archived   from the original on 27 april 2016.   ^   parker, rj (2015).   forensic analysis and dna in criminal investigations: including cold cases solved   . rj parker publishing. p. 66.   isbn   9781514348369   .   ^   "visible proofs: forensic views of the body: galleries: technologies: the marsh test"   .   archived   from the original on 7 october 2015   . retrieved   4 november   2015   .   ^   mcmuigan, hugh (1921).   an introduction to chemical pharmacology   . philadelphia: p. blakiston's son & co. pp. 396–397   . retrieved   16 december   2007   .   ^   james marsh (1836).   "account of a method of separating small quantities of arsenic from substances with which it may be mixed"   .   edinburgh new philosophical journal   . a. and c. black.   21   : 229–236.   archived   from the original on 4 september 2015.   ^   "ballistics"   . archived from   the original   on 17 october 2014   . retrieved   15 january   2014   .   ^   as reported in, "a fingerprint fable: the will and william west case".   "scafo online articles"   . archived from   the original   on 10 november 2005   . retrieved   19 december   2005   .   ^   a   b   kirsten moana thompson,   crime films: investigating the scene   . london: wallflower press (2007): 10   ^   ginzburg, carlo   (1984). "morelli, freud, and sherlock holmes: clues and scientific method".  in   eco, umberto   ;   sebeok, thomas   (eds.).   the sign of three: dupin, holmes, peirce   . bloomington, in: history workshop, indiana university press. p.   105   .   isbn   978-0-253-35235-4   .   lccn   82049207   .   oclc   9412985   .   ^   herschel, william j (1916).   the origin of finger-printing   (pdf)   . oxford university press.   isbn   978-1-104-66225-7   . archived from   the original   (pdf)   on 25 july 2011   . retrieved   15 january   2014   .   ^   herschel, william james (25 november 1880).   "skin furrows of the hand"   (pdf)   .   nature   .   23   (578): 76.   bibcode   :   1880natur..23...76h   .   doi   :   10.1038/023076b0   .   s2cid   4068612   . archived from   the original   (pdf)   on 15 june 2011   . retrieved   15 january   2014   .   ^   faulds, henry (28 october 1880).   "on the skin-furrows of the hand"   (pdf)   .   nature   .   22   (574): 605.   bibcode   :   1880natur..22..605f   .   doi   :   10.1038/022605a0   .   s2cid   4117214   . archived from   the original   (pdf)   on 12 september 2008   . retrieved   15 january   2014   .   ^   reid, donald l. (2003). "dr. henry faulds – beith commemorative society".   journal of forensic identification   .   53   (2).   see also this on-line article on henry faulds:   tredoux, gavan (december 2003).   "henry faulds: the invention of a fingerprinter"   . galton.org. archived from   the original   on 2 june 2013   . retrieved   15 january   2014   .   ^   galton, francis (1892).   "finger prints"   (pdf)   . london: macmillan and co. archived from   the original   (pdf)   on 12 october 2006.   ^   tewari, rk; ravikumar, kv (2000). "history and development of forensic science in india".   j postgrad med   .   46   (46): 303–308.   pmid   11435664   .   ^   sodhi, j.s.; kaur, asjeed (2005).   "the forgotten indian pioneers of finger print science"   (pdf)   .   current science   .   88   (1): 185–191. archived from   the original   (pdf)   on 8 february 2005.   ^   introduction to u.s. 23 dec 1905 new york – the city record volume 33   ^   michael kurland,   irrefutable evidence: a history of forensic science   (p. 200), dee, 2009,   isbn   9781461662396   ^   keith inman, norah rudin,   principles and practice of criminalistics: the profession of forensic science   (p. 32), crc press, 2000   ^   "forensic cases: colin pitchfork, first exoneration through dna"   .   exploreforensics.co.uk   .   ^   canter, david   (1994),   criminal shadows: inside the mind of the serial killer   , london: harpercollins, pp. 12–13,   isbn   0-00-255215-9   ^   inspector   donald swanson   's report to the home office,   19 october   1888, ho 144/221/a49301c, quoted in begg,   jack the ripper: the definitive history   , p. 205; evans and rumbelow, p. 113; evans and skinner,   the ultimate jack the ripper sourcebook   , p. 125   ^   inspector donald swanson's report to the   home office   ,   19 october   1888, ho 144/221/a49301c, quoted in begg,   jack the ripper: the definitive history   , p. 206 and evans and skinner,   the ultimate jack the ripper sourcebook   , p. 125   ^   marriott, john, "the imaginative geography of the whitechapel murders", in werner, p. 48   ^   rumbelow, p. 93;   the daily telegraph   ,   10 november   1888, quoted in evans and skinner,   the ultimate jack the ripper sourcebook   , p. 341   ^   robert anderson to home office,   10 january   1889, 144/221/a49301c ff. 235–236, quoted in evans and skinner,   the ultimate jack the ripper sourcebook   , p. 399   ^   evans and rumbelow, pp. 186–187; evans and skinner,   the ultimate jack the ripper sourcebook   , pp. 359–360   ^   canter, pp. 5–6   ^   a   b   c   letter from thomas bond to robert anderson,   10 november   1888, ho 144/221/a49301c, quoted in evans and skinner,   the ultimate jack the ripper sourcebook   , pp. 360–362 and rumbelow, pp. 145–147   ^   green, martin (1999).   otto gross, freudian psychoanalyst, 1877–1920   . lampeter:   edwin mellen press   .   isbn   0-7734-8164-8   .   ^   [1]   archived   6 february 2007 at the   wayback machine   ^   alexander bird (27 june 2006). "abductive knowledge and holmesian inference".  in tamar szabo gendler; john hawthorne (eds.).   oxford studies in epistemology   . p. 11.   isbn   978-0-19-928590-7   .   ^   matthew bunson (19 october 1994).   encyclopedia sherlockiana   . p. 50.   isbn   978-0-671-79826-0   .   ^   jonathan smith (1994).   fact and feeling: baconian science and the nineteenth-century literary imagination   . p. 214.   isbn   978-0-299-14354-1   .   ^   "murder is her hobby: frances glessner lee and the nutshell studies of unexplained death"   .   ^   newton, giles (4 february 2004).   "discovering dna fingerprinting: sir alec jeffreys describes its development"   .   wellcome trust   . archived from   the original   on 5 march 2010   . retrieved   23 december   2007   .   ^   [2]   archived   9 june 2016 at the   wayback machine   ^   "chartered society of forensic sciences publications"   . archived from   the original   on 15 june 2016   . retrieved   3 june   2016   .   ^   journal of forensic sciences   archived   23 november 2010 at the   wayback machine   ^   "the british academy of forensic sciences"   . archived from   the original   on 27 june 2015   . retrieved   26 june   2015   .   ^   "medicine, science and the law"   . archived from   the original   on 27 june 2015   . retrieved   26 june   2015   .   ^   hawkins, stuart (november 2016).   "using a drone and photogrammetry software to create orthomosaic images and 3d models of aircraft accident sites"   (pdf)   .   uk aaib   . archived from   the original   (pdf)   on 13 january 2017   . retrieved   4 february   2017   – via international society of air safety investigators.   ^   "national institute of standards and technology" group="scientist in practice">   aguilar, james.   "forensic science laboratories: handbook for facility planning, design, construction, and relocation"   (pdf)   .   https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2013/nist.ir.7941.pdf   . national institute of standards and technology   . retrieved   15 april   2019   .   external link in   |website=   (   help   )   ^   ruffell, a; mckinley, j (2014).   "forensic geomorphology"   (pdf)   .   geomorphology   .   206   : 14–22.   bibcode   :   2014geomo.206...14r   .   doi   :   10.1016/j.geomorph.2013.12.020   .   ^   pringle, jk; ruffell, a; jervis, jr; donnelly, l; mckinley, j; hansen, j; morgan, r; pirrie, d; harrison, m (2012).   "the use of geoscience methods for terrestrial forensic searches"   .   earth-science reviews   .   114   (1–2): 108–123.   bibcode   :   2012esrv..114..108p   .   doi   :   10.1016/j.earscirev.2012.05.006   .   ^   parker, r; ruffell, a; hughes, d; pringle, jk (2010). "geophysics and the search of freshwater bodies: a review".   science & justice   .   50   (3): 141–149.   doi   :   10.1016/j.scijus.2009.09.001   .   pmid   20709275   .   ^   p.611 jahankhani, hamid; watson, david lilburn; me, gianluigi   handbook of electronic security and digital forensics   world scientific, 2009   ^   "forensic serology"   . forensic-medecine.info. archived from   the original   on 6 may 2010   . retrieved   8 june   2010   .   ^   saks, michael j.; faigman, david l. (2008).   "failed forensics: how forensic science lost its way and how it might yet find it"   .   annual review of law and social science   .   4   : 149–171.   doi   :   10.1146/annurev.lawsocsci.4.110707.172303   .   ^   solomon, john (18 november 2007).   "fbi's forensic test full of holes"   .   the washington post   . p. a1.   archived   from the original on 25 july 2008   . retrieved   5 march   2008   .   ^   ross williams, roger (director) (15 april 2020).   the innocence files   (television show). netflix.   ^   santos, fernanda (28 january 2007).   "evidence from bite marks, it turns out, is not so elementary"   .   the new york times   .   archived   from the original on 10 april 2011   . retrieved   5 march   2008   .   ^   mcroberts, flynn (29 november 2004).   "bite-mark verdict faces new scrutiny"   .   chicago tribune   . retrieved   5 march   2008   .   ^   mcroberts, flynn (19 october 2004).   "from the start, a faulty science"   .   chicago tribune   .   archived   from the original on 10 december 2015   . retrieved   26 august   2014   .   ^   polloack, andrew (17 august 2009).   " dna evidence can be fabricated, scientists show"   archived   6 february 2017 at the   wayback machine   .   the new york times   .   ^   raloff, janet (19 january 2008).   "judging science"   .   science news   . p. 42 (vol. 173, no. 3). archived from   the original   on 28 february 2008   . retrieved   5 march   2008   .   ^   "forensic science."   u.s. bureau of labor statistics   . u.s. bureau of labor statistics, 17 december 2015. web.   ^   flavin, brianna (quoting brian mckenna, retired police lieutenant and crime scene investigator),   "how accurate are crime shows on tv? debunking 7 common myths,"   archived   31 may 2017 at the   wayback machine   7 february 2017,   blog,   school of justice studies, rasmussen college, inc., oak brook, il, retrieved 31 may 2017   ^   stanton, dawn (quoting robert shaler, ph.d., prof. of biochemistry and molecular biology,  dir., forensic science program,   penn. state univ.   . formerly at pittsburgh crime laboratory, new york city office of chief medical examiner, and lifecodes corp (nation's first forensic dna laboratory)),   "probing question: is forensic science on tv accurate?,"   archived   6 december 2016 at the   wayback machine   10 november 2009, eberly college of science,   penn. state univ.   , retrieved 31 may 2017   ^   holmgren, janne a.; fordham, judith (january 2011). "the csi effect and the canadian and the australian jury".   journal of forensic sciences   .   56   (s1): s63–s71.   doi   :   10.1111/j.1556-4029.2010.01621.x   .   pmid   21155799   .   s2cid   21221066   .   ^   a   b   alldredge, john   "the 'csi effect' and its potential impact on juror decisions,"   archived   2 september 2016 at the   wayback machine   (2015)   themis: research journal of justice studies and forensic science   : vol. 3: iss. 1, article 6., retrieved 31 may 2017   ^   "   '   badly fragmented' forensic science system needs overhaul"   . the national academies. 18 february 2009. archived from   the original   on 26 august 2009   . retrieved   9 march   2009   .   ^   "national academy of sciences finds 'serious deficiencies' in nation's crime labs"   . national association of criminal defense lawyers. 18 february 2009. archived from   the original   on 5 march 2010   . retrieved   7 march   2009   .   ^   a   b   c   katherine ramsland (6 march 2009).   "csi: without a clue; a new report forces police and judges to rethink forensic science"   .   the new york post   , postscript   . archived from   the original   on 10 march 2009   . retrieved   7 march   2009   .   ^   jessica gabel, lawyer and lecturer from nova   "forensics on trial"   archived   27 june 2017 at the   wayback machine   ^   strengthening forensic science in the united states: a path forward   . nap.edu. 2009.   doi   :   10.17226/12589   .   isbn   978-0-309-13130-8   .   archived   from the original on 27 may 2010   . retrieved   8 june   2010   .   ^   a   b   liptak, adam; blumenthal, ralph (5 august 2004).   "new doubt cast on testing in houston police crime lab"   .   the new york times   .   archived   from the original on 31 october 2014   . retrieved   24 october   2014   .   ^   "why become an accredited laboratory?"   (pdf)   .   american society of crime laboratory directors / laboratory accreditation board   . archived from   the original   (pdf)   on 25 october 2014   . retrieved   20 october   2014   .   ^   fabiola carletti (21 august 2012).   "how body parts evidence gets from crime scene to courtroom"   .   cbc news   , postscript.   archived   from the original on 21 august 2012   . retrieved   21 august   2012   .   ^   a   b   c   baker rb, fargo jd, shambley-ebron d, sommers ms. a source of healthcare disparity: race, skin color, and injuries after rape among adolescents and young adults. journal of forensic nursing, 2010; 6: 144-150   ^   "forensic science and humanitarian action"   . icrc. 28 july 2014.   archived   from the original on 7 july 2014   . retrieved   3 august   2014   .   ^   forensic archeology and anthropology (28 february 2012).   "forensic archeology and anthropology"   . ic-mp.org. archived from   the original   on 24 june 2014   . retrieved   3 august   2014   .   ^   "southeast europe"   . ic-mp.org. 28 february 2012. archived from   the original   on 13 august 2014   . retrieved   3 august   2014   .   ^   "minnesota protocol on the investigation of potentially unlawful death (2016)"   (pdf)   . retrieved   30 june   2017   .   [   permanent dead link   ]   external links   [   edit   ]   wikimedia commons has media related to   forensic science   .   forensic science   at   curlie   forensic educational resources   retrieved from "   https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=forensic_science&oldid=1005025588   "   categories   :   forensics   applied sciences   criminology   heuristics   medical aspects of death   hidden categories:   webarchive template wayback links   cs1: julian–gregorian uncertainty   cs1 errors: external links   all articles with dead external links   articles with dead external links from july 2018   articles with permanently dead external links   articles with short description   short description matches wikidata   use dmy dates from october 2018   articles containing latin-language text   articles needing additional references from november 2014   all articles needing additional references   all articles with unsourced statements   articles with unsourced statements from november 2014   articles with unsourced statements from august 2013   cs1: long volume value   commons category link is on wikidata   articles with curlie links   navigation menu   personal tools   not logged in   talk   contributions   create account   log in   namespaces   article   talk   variants   views   read   edit   view history   more   search   navigation   main page   contents   current events   random article   about wikipedia   contact us   donate   contribute   help   learn to edit   community portal   recent changes   upload file   tools   what links here   related changes   upload file   special pages   permanent link   page information   cite this page   wikidata item   print/export   download as pdf   printable version   in other projects   wikimedia commons   wikiversity   languages   català   deutsch   eesti   español   euskara   français   hrvatski   bahasa indonesia   italiano   bahasa melayu   minangkabau   nederlands   português   shqip   simple english   tagalog   türkçe   winaray   edit links   this page was last edited on 5 february 2021, at 16:16   (utc)   .   text is available under the   creative commons attribution-sharealike license   ;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the   terms of use   and   privacy policy   . wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the   wikimedia foundation, inc.   , a non-profit organization.   privacy policy   about wikipedia   disclaimers   contact wikipedia   mobile view   developers   statistics   cookie statement   