https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_microscope
Comparison microscope - Wikipedia

comparison microscope - wikipedia   comparison microscope   from wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   jump to navigation   jump to search   in a comparison microscope, two identical microscopes are connected to a single comparison eyepiece. the viewer sees the images from both microscopes next to one another, as in the inset image.   a   comparison microscope   is a device used to analyze side-by-side specimens. it consists of two   microscopes   connected by an optical bridge, which results in a split view window enabling two separate objects to be viewed simultaneously. this avoids the observer having to rely on memory when comparing two objects under a conventional microscope.   contents   1   history   1.1   col. calvin h. goddard   2   modern comparison microscope   3   forensic ballistics   4   notable cases   4.1   sacco and vanzetti case   4.2   st. valentine's day massacre   5   references   6   external links   7   see also   history   [   edit   ]   one of the first prototypes of a comparison microscope was developed in 1913 in germany.   [1]   in 1929, using a comparison microscope adapted for forensic ballistics, calvin goddard and his partner phillip gravelle were able to absolve the chicago police department of participation in the st. valentine's day massacre.   col. calvin h. goddard   [   edit   ]   main article:   calvin hooker goddard   philip o. gravelle, a   chemist   , developed a comparison microscope for use in the identification of fired   bullets   and   cartridge cases   with the support and guidance of forensic ballistics pioneer calvin goddard. it was a significant advance in the science of   firearms   identification in   forensic science   . the firearm from which a bullet or cartridge case has been fired is identified by the comparison of the unique striae left on the bullet or cartridge case from the worn, machined metal of the   barrel   , breach block,   extractor   , or   firing pin   in the   gun   . it was gravelle who mistrusted his memory. "as long as he could inspect only one bullet at a time with his microscope, and had to keep the picture of it in his memory until he placed the comparison bullet under the microscope, scientific precision could not be attained. he therefore developed the comparison microscope and goddard made it work." calvin goddard perfected the comparison microscope and subsequently popularized its use.   [2]   sir sydney smith   also appreciated the idea, emphasizing its importance in forensic science and firearms identification. he took the comparison microscope to   scotland   and introduced it to the european scientists for firearms identification and other forensic science needs.   modern comparison microscope   [   edit   ]   the modern instrument has many   optical   ,   mechanical   and   electronic   refinements, including   fiber optic   illumination,   video   capabilities, digital imaging, automatic exposure for conventional photography, etc. despite this evolution, however, the basic tools and techniques have remained unchanged which are to determine whether or not ammunition components were fired by a single   firearm   based on unique and reproducible microscopic and class characteristics, or to reach a "no conclusion" result if insufficient marks are present.   [3]   since, ballistic identification has benefited from a long series of structural, scientific and technological advances, law enforcement agencies have established forensic laboratories and researchers have learned much more about how to match   bullets   and   cartridge cases   to the guns used to fire them, and comparison microscopes have become more sophisticated. by the end of the 1980s, ballistic identification was an established sub-specialty of   forensic science   .   visualization tools have also been developed to allows the firearms examiner to verify the degree of similarity between any two tool-marks in question. these are designed to simulate the operation of the comparison microscope but is capable of rendering a 2d view of the 3d surfaces in a manner similar to that of the conventional comparison microscope.   forensic ballistics   [   edit   ]   main article:   ballistics   the prevalence of hand-gun related crime in the   united states   compared to most other developed countries provided the impetus for the development of the comparison microscope.   [   citation needed   ]   as with most firearms, the fired   ammunition   components may acquire sufficient unique and reproducible microscopic marks to be identifiable as having been fired by a single firearm. making these comparisons is correctly referred to as firearms identification, or sometimes called as "ballistics".   historically, and currently, this   forensic discipline   ultimately requires a microscopic side-by-side comparison of fired   bullets   or   cartridge cases   , one pair at a time, by a forensic examiner to confirm or eliminate the two items as having been fired by a single firearm. for this purpose, the traditional tool of the firearms examiner has been what is often called the ballistics comparison microscope.   the interior of a gun's barrel is machined to have grooves (called   rifling   ) that force the bullet to rotate as it travels along it. these grooves and their counterpart, called "lands" imprint groove and land impressions on the surface of the bullet. together with these land and groove impressions, imperfections on the   barrel   surface are incidentally transferred to the bullet's surface. because these imperfections are randomly generated, during manufacture or due to use, they are unique to each barrel. these patterns or imperfections, therefore, amount to a "signature" that each barrel imprints on each of the bullets fired through it. it is this "signature" on the bullets imparted due to the unique imperfections on the barrel that enable the validation and identification of bullets as having originated from a particular gun. comparison microscope is used to analyze the matching of the microscopic impressions found on the surface of bullets and casings.   when a firearm or a bullet or cartridge case are recovered from a   crime scene   , forensic examiners compare the   ballistic fingerprint   of the recovered bullet or cartridge case with the ballistic fingerprint of a second bullet or cartridge case test-fired from the recovered firearm. if the ballistic fingerprint on the test-fired bullet or cartridge case matches the ballistic fingerprint on the recovered bullet or cartridge case, investigators know that the recovered bullet or cartridge case was also fired from the recovered gun. a confirmed link between a specific firearm and a bullet or cartridge case recovered from a crime scene constitutes a valuable lead, because investigators may be able to connect the firearm to a person, who may then become either a suspect or a source of information helpful to the investigation.   notable cases   [   edit   ]   sacco and vanzetti case   [   edit   ]   main article:   sacco and vanzetti   forensic innovator   calvin goddard   offered ballistic identification evidence in 1921 to help secure   convictions   of accused murderers and anarchists   nicola sacco   and   bartolomeo vanzetti   . on april 8, 1927, sacco and vanzetti were finally sentenced to death in the   electric chair   . a worldwide outcry arose and governor alvin t. fuller finally agreed to postpone the   executions   and set up a committee to reconsider the case. by this time, firearms examination had improved considerably, and it was now known that a   semi-automatic pistol   could be traced by several different methods if both   bullet   and   casing   were recovered from the scene. automatic pistols could now be traced by unique markings of the rifling on the bullet, by   firing pin   indentations on the fired primer, or by unique ejector and   extractor   marks on the casing. the committee appointed to review the case used the services of   calvin goddard   in 1927.
goddard used philip gravelle's newly invented comparison microscope and helixometer, a hollow, lighted magnifier probe used to inspect   gun barrels   , to make an examination of sacco's .32 colt, the bullet that killed berardelli, and the spent casings recovered from the scene of the crime. in the presence of one of the defense experts, he fired a bullet from sacco's gun into a wad of cotton and then put the ejected casing on the comparison microscope next to casings found at the scene. then he looked at them carefully. the first two casings from the robbery did not match sacco's gun, but the third one did. even the defense expert agreed that the two cartridges had been fired from the same gun. the second original defense expert also concurred. the committee upheld the convictions.
in october 1961, ballistics tests were run with improved technology using sacco's colt automatic. the results confirmed that the bullet that killed the victim, berardelli in 1920 came from the same .32 colt auto taken from the pistol in sacco's possession. subsequent investigations in 1983 also supported goddard's findings.   st. valentine's day massacre   [   edit   ]   main article:   st. valentine's day massacre   colonel goddard was the key forensic expert in solving the 1929   st. valentine's day massacre   in which seven gangsters were killed by rival   al capone   mobsters   dressed as   chicago police   officers. it also led to the establishment of the united states' first independent criminological laboratory, which was located at   northwestern university   and headed by goddard. at this new lab,   ballistics   ,   fingerprinting   , blood analysis and   trace evidence   were all brought under one roof.
in 1929, using a comparison microscope adapted for the ballistics comparison by his partner, phillip gravelle, goddard used similar techniques to absolve the chicago police department of participation in the   st. valentine's day massacre   . the case of sacco and vanzetti, which took place in bridgewater, massachusetts, is responsible for popularizing the use of the comparison microscope for bullet comparison. forensic expert calvin goddard's conclusions were upheld when the evidence was re-examined in 1961.   references   [   edit   ]   ^   "a double microscope with one eyepiece"   .   popular mechanics magazine   .   19   : 642. may 1913 – via hathitrust.   ^   jurgen thorwald,   the century of the detective   , new york: harcourt, brace & world, 1964   ^   john h. dillon, jr , comparison microscopy: the origins of firearms identification, a practical application of forensic science, technology and engineering to case linkage in shooting incidents not previously related by investigative personnel, bullettrax-3d, matchpoint plus and the firearms examiner, 2005.   external links   [   edit   ]   seibert wetzlar vergleichsmikroskop   comparison microscopes   virtual comparison microscope   see also   [   edit   ]   association of firearm and tool mark examiners   rifling   v   t   e   laboratory equipment   general   heaters   dryers   alcohol burner   bunsen burner   desiccator   heating mantle   hot plate   lab oven   kiln   meker–fisher burner   striker   teclu burner   water bath   vacuum dry box   mixers   shakers   chemostat   homogenizer   liquid whistle   magnetic stirrer   mortar and pestle   shaker   sonicator   static mixer   stirring rod   vortex mixer   wash bottle   stands   clamps   holders   beaker clamp   clamp holder   tripod   burette clamp   extension clamp   flask clamp   funnel support   iron ring   pinch clamp   retort stand   screw clamp   test tube holder   test tube rack   wire gauze   lab drying rack   containers   storage   agar plate   cryogenic storage dewar   incubator   laminar flow cabinet   microtiter plate   petri dish   picotiter plate   refrigerator   weighing boat   weighing dish   other items   aspirator   autoclave   balance brush   cork borer   crucible   filter paper   file   forceps   centrifuge   microscope   pipeclay triangle   spectrophotometer   splint   stopper   scoopula   spatula   test tube brush   wire brush   inoculation needle   inoculation loop   glassware   apparatus   dean–stark   soxhlet extractor   kipp's   bottles   boston round   condensers   cold finger   liebig   dishes   evaporating   petri   syracuse   watch glass   flasks   büchner   vacuum (dewar)   erlenmeyer   fernbach   fleaker   florence   retort   round-bottom   schlenk   volumetric   funnels   büchner   hirsch   dropping   separatory   measuring devices   burette   conical measure   cuvette   eye dropper   eudiometer   graduated cylinder   ostwald viscometer   pipette   tubes   drying   cragie   nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr)   test   thiele   thistle   other items   beaker   bell jar   gas syringe   vial   analytical chemistry   compositional   autoanalyzer   chn analyzer   colorimeter   inductively coupled plasma (icp) device   gas chromatograph (gc)   liquid chromatograph (lc)   mass spectrometer (ms)   ph indicator   ph meter   microscopy   scanning electron microscope (sem)   transmission electron microscope (tem)   thermochemistry   calorimeter   differential scanning   melting-point apparatus   thermometer   thermogravimetric analyzer (tga)   other items   analytical balance   colony counter   spiral plater   nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) instrument   plate reader   electronics   ammeter   current source   function generator   galvanostat   multimeter   network analyzer   oscilloscope   pulse generator   potentiostat   spectrum analyzer   time-domain reflectometer   voltage source   voltmeter   safety   personal protective   equipment (ppe)   lab coat   face shield   respirator   rubber apron   safety shower   eye and hand   acid-resistant gloves   eyewash station   glove box   medical gloves   nitrile gloves   safety glasses   safety goggles   other items   acid (solvent) cabinet   biosafety cabinet   fire blanket   fire extinguisher   fume hood   instruments used in medical laboratories   retrieved from "   https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=comparison_microscope&oldid=993849991   "   categories   :   microscopes   laboratory equipment   optical devices   ballistics   forensic equipment   comparisons   hidden categories:   all articles with unsourced statements   articles with unsourced statements from september 2010   navigation menu   personal tools   not logged in   talk   contributions   create account   log in   namespaces   article   talk   variants   views   read   edit   view history   more   search   navigation   main page   contents   current events   random article   about wikipedia   contact us   donate   contribute   help   learn to edit   community portal   recent changes   upload file   tools   what links here   related changes   upload file   special pages   permanent link   page information   cite this page   wikidata item   print/export   download as pdf   printable version   in other projects   wikimedia commons   languages   deutsch   polski   edit links   this page was last edited on 12 december 2020, at 20:39   (utc)   .   text is available under the   creative commons attribution-sharealike license   ;
additional terms may apply.  by using this site, you agree to the   terms of use   and   privacy policy   . wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the   wikimedia foundation, inc.   , a non-profit organization.   privacy policy   about wikipedia   disclaimers   contact wikipedia   mobile view   developers   statistics   cookie statement   