https://www.zeiss.com/microscopy/us/solutions/laboratory-routine/forensic-science-microscope/gunshot-residue-analysis.html
Forensic Gunshot Residue Analysis with Microscopes

forensic gunshot residue analysis with microscopes   ×   microscopy   service & support   contact   online shop   resources   blog   you are here:   home   solutions   laboratory routine   forensic science microscope   gunshot residue analysis   united states   usa   contact   online shop   resources   blog   service & support   ×   select a country or region   microscopy   service & support   service & support   home   solutions   laboratory routine   forensic science microscope   gunshot residue analysis   forensic analysis of gunshot residue   find your product   benefits   recommended products   downloads   topics   contact us   benefits   recommended products   downloads   contact us   as a criminal investigator, you need to reconstruct crime scenes where firearms were used. determining whether it was homicide or suicide, or who may have shot the firearm might be critical to a case.   qualified forensic experts may be able to assist you with such investigations through the use of gunshot residue analysis. gunshot residue (gsr) is particles that originate from partially reacted components of explosive primer and propellant as well as the bullet, cartridge case, and the firearm.   during forensic analysis, you can find gsr on the hands, hair and clothing of a person who has recently discharged a firearm, on an entrance wound of a victim, or on any other persons and objects that have been in the vicinity of the crime scene. particles can be collected from a suspected shooter’s hand, for example, by using sample mounts (stubs) or adhesive tapes.   scanning electron microscopes with energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy allow the identification of very small amounts of gsr particles and the subsequent analysis of the surface morphology and composition of individual gsr particles with high accuracy.   recommended products for forensic analysis of gunshot residue   zeiss evo scanning electron microscope   modular sem platform for intuitive operation   zeiss sigma scanning electron microscope   sigma is your field emission sem for high quality imaging and advanced analytical microscopy. the gemini objective lens design combines electrostatic and magnetic fields to maximize optical performance while reducing field influences at the sample to a minimum. sigma’s best-in-class eds geometry increases your analytical productivity, especially on beam sensitive samples. the short analytical working distance of 8.5 mm and a take-off angle of 35°allows you to obtain analytical data at half of the default probe currents and at twice the speed. the high stability of the sigma column provides the means for fast and complete x-ray analysis and mapping. this is due to the fact that placing the detectors closer to the sample facilitates achieving complete shadow-free analytical results. a. with sigma you can reliably detect particles < 0.5 µm in size and distinguish them from the environmental particles.   high quality imaging and advanced analytical microscopy   downloads   flyer: taking a new look at forensics   zeiss microscope systems for forensic sciences   pages: 2   file size: 1551 kb   download   results 1 - 1 of 1   not all products are available in every country. use of products for medical diagnostic, therapeutic or treatment purposes may be limited by local regulations. contact your local zeiss provider for more information.   about us   download portal   subscribe to newsletter   about zeiss   career   press & media   publisher   legal notice   data protection   