https://www.azolifesciences.com/article/Uses-of-Microscopy-in-Forensics.aspx

	Uses of Microscopy in Forensics


uses of microscopy in forensics   about   news   articles   interviews   lab equipment   directory   newsletters   advertise   more...   meet the team   contact us   search   top life science categories   analytical chemistry   antibodies and immunology   cannabis analysis and testing   cell biology   drug discovery, manufacturing and development   food and agricultural sciences   genetics and genomics   lab automation and bioinformatics   microscopy   proteomics, metabolomics and lipidomics   view all articles   ×   top life science categories   analytical chemistry   food and agricultural sciences   antibodies and immunology   genetics and genomics   cannabis analysis and testing   lab automation and bioinformatics   cell biology   microscopy   drug discovery, manufacturing and development   proteomics, metabolomics and lipidomics   view all articles   advertise   meet the team   contact us   search   facebook   twitter   become a member   search   menu   uses of microscopy in forensics   download   pdf copy   by   sarah moore, m.sc.   reviewed by   ana-maria tomova, ph.d.   forensic science has many applications in a variety of fields, forensic science can be used to investigate ancient civilizations and its primary use is within crime scene investigation in identifying evidence. microscopy is vital to multiple areas within forensic science and there is a variety of techniques utilized.   image credit: couperfield/shutterstock.com   microscopy in criminal science   microscopy can be applied in the identification of trace evidence such as fragments, fibers, hairs, fingerprints which are left the crime scene, on a victim or suspect.   when a gun is fired, it leaves behind a chemical residue, known as gunshot residue (gsr). this residue can help identify a weapon used at a crime scene and link a suspect to a crime if the gsr is found to match that which was left at the scene of the crime.   the tiny particles that makeup gsr measure between a few hundred nanometers to a few microns.   therefore, scanning electron microscopy and energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (sem/edx) analysis may be used to investigate gunshot residue, distinguishing the shape of the particles and their chemical composition revealing their distinct chemical composition, allowing for the identification of a potential weapon.   fragments of glass may be found in incidents such as house break-ins and road traffic accidents. microscopes can be used to compare shattered glass left at the scene to that found on a suspect. different types of glass have varying compositions, allowing scientists to analyze its origin by looking closely at its structure.   related stories   scientists determine biological mechanism that may lead to more efficient antibiotics   high-speed atomic force microscopy sheds light on structure, dynamics of intrinsically disordered proteins   researchers set a new record in x-ray microscopy   fingerprints are incredibly useful for identifying perpetrators in a crime scene. scanning electron microscopy and energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy can be used to magnify the prints and match them to a potential suspect or victim.   microscopy in forensic epidemiology   forensic epidemiologists investigate how disease spreads. in   epidemiology   , microscopes can be used to investigate the root of an outbreak by tracing the pathogen involved to its source. this information can be essential in preventing further infection, reducing the risk of an epidemic.   microscopy in forensic anthropology   microscopes have many uses in the field of forensic anthropology, the field of identifying the factors of death. for example, bone and other body tissues can be investigated using a microscope to gain clues about the cause of death.   scanning electron microscopes are often used to study soil samples taken from the location of a body to determine the length of time the body had been there, the bones can be investigated for sharp force trauma and the coating left on the teeth may be examined, which can also be indicative of a cause of death.   microscopy in forensic pathology   similar to forensic anthropology, forensic pathology investigates and determines the cause of death. the difference between forensic anthropology and forensic pathology is that forensic pathologist aims to establish the exact cause of death, rather than indicators of potential events leading to death.   microscopy can be used to identify the bacteria or virus which caused death, or to examine body tissue for wounds, determining cause and investigating the potential for the would be fatal.   overall, there are a number of uses of microscopy in forensics. as technology continues to advance, it is expected that there will be further applications of microscopes in forensics.   references:   bartelink, e. j., wiersema, j. m., & demaree, r. s. (2001). quantitative analysis of sharp-force trauma: an application of scanning electron microscopy in forensic anthropology.   journal of forensic science   ,   46   (6), 1288-1293.   jones, b. j., downham, r., & sears, v. g. (2010). effect of substrate surface topography on forensic development of latent fingerprints with iron oxide powder suspension.   surface and interface analysis: an international journal devoted to the development and application of techniques for the analysis of surfaces, interfaces, and thin films   ,   42   (5), 438-442.   jones, b. (2019). microscopy in forensic sciences.   springer handbook of microscopy   , pp.2-2.   korda, e. j., macdonell, h. l., & williams, j. p. (1970). forensic applications of the scanning electron microscope.   j. crim. l. criminology & police sci.   ,   61   , 453.   meng, h. h., & caddy, b. (1997). gunshot residue analysis—a review.   journal of forensic science   ,   42   (4), 553-570.   further reading   all microscopy content   microscopy and artificial intelligence   applications of scanning electron microscopy   how do polarized light microscopes work?   applications of polarized light microscopy   more...   last updated: mar 18, 2020   written by   sarah moore   after studying psychology and then neuroscience, sarah quickly found her enjoyment for researching and writing research papers; turning to a passion to connect ideas with people through writing.   download   pdf copy   citations   please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   apa   moore, sarah. (2020, march 18). uses of microscopy in forensics. azolifesciences. retrieved on february 20, 2021 from https://www.azolifesciences.com/article/uses-of-microscopy-in-forensics.aspx.   mla   moore, sarah. "uses of microscopy in forensics".   azolifesciences   . 20 february 2021. <https://www.azolifesciences.com/article/uses-of-microscopy-in-forensics.aspx>.   chicago   moore, sarah. "uses of microscopy in forensics". azolifesciences. https://www.azolifesciences.com/article/uses-of-microscopy-in-forensics.aspx. (accessed february 20, 2021).   harvard   moore, sarah. 2020.   uses of microscopy in forensics   . azolifesciences, viewed 20 february 2021, https://www.azolifesciences.com/article/uses-of-microscopy-in-forensics.aspx.   suggested reading   new technique reveals natural structure of large enzyme complex   researchers use super-resolution microscopy to study bacterial infection mechanisms   automated electron microscopy helps visualize neural function and behavior   cryogenic electron microscopy reveals shape of glutamate transporters involved in neurological diseases   a new method for quantitative single-molecule colocalization analysis   researchers use new technique to visualize the world of lipid dynamics   scientists develop novel approach to acquire fluorescence lifetime images   scientists use new technology to observe dna defects in children with fanconi anemia   comments   the opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of azolifesciences.   cancel reply to comment   post a new comment   login   (logout)   post   trending   articles   latest   interviews   latest   articles   immunology of infectious diseases   innate vs adaptive immune responses   advantages and limitations of fluorescence microscopy   role of bioinformatics in agriculture   everything you need to know about palm oil   using soil bacteria for antibiotic production   dr. christophe corre   in this interview, azolifesciences speaks to dr. christophe corre about his latest research that investigated soil bacteria and how it could be used to produce antibiotics.   forensic identification from a single strand of hair   dr. shinsuke kunimura   azolifesciences speaks to dr. shinsuke kunimura about his latest research which involved combining raman spectroscopy and x-ray fluorescence to identify an individual from a single strand of hair.   detecting levels of antibiotics in food   dr. yujie ben   in this interview, azolifesciences speaks to dr. yujie ben about her latest research that investigated the varying levels of antibiotics found in food.   automation in agriculture   covid-19 and food safety   electron microscopy: an overview   innate vs adaptive immune responses   dna methylation in cancer   latest life science news   using soil bacteria for antibiotic production   cryogenic electron microscopy reveals shape of glutamate transporters involved in neurological diseases   almost one in five people lack key protein in their muscle fibers   study reveals novel antibody binding implicated in liver and breast cancer   new hydrogel shrinks tumors in melanoma mice model   newsletters you may be   interested in   life science microscopy   (   subscribe or preview   )   forensics & toxicology   (   subscribe or preview   )   agritech   (   subscribe or preview   )   see all newsletters »   other sites from azonetwork   azom   azonano   azorobotics   azocleantech   azooptics   azobuild   azomining   azosensors   azoquantum   news medical   useful links   about   news   articles   interviews   lab equipment   directory   newsletters   the team   become a member   newsletters   contact   search   advertise   terms & conditions   privacy & cookie policy   update your privacy preferences   sitemap   back to top   facebook   twitter   azolifesciences.com - an azonetwork site   owned and operated by azonetwork, © 2000-2021   we use cookies to enhance your experience. by continuing to browse this site you agree to our use of cookies.   more info   .   accept   cookie settings   you might also like...   ×   novel microscopy system for scanless 3d measurement with submicron resolution   