https://www.news-medical.net/life-sciences/Forensic-Applications-of-Fluorescent-Microscopy.aspx

	Forensic Applications of Fluorescent Microscopy


forensic applications of fluorescent microscopy   medical home   life sciences home   become a member   search   medical home   life sciences home   about   covid-19   news   health a-z   drugs   medical devices   interviews   white papers   more...   mediknowledge   newsletters   health & personal care   contact   meet the team   advertise   search   top health categories   coronavirus disease covid-19   allergies   alzheimer's & dementia   arthritis & rheumatology   breast cancer   cold, flu & cough   depression   diet & nutrition   eating disorders   eye health   gastrointestinal health   heart disease   high blood pressure   lung cancer   pregnancy   type 1 diabetes   type 2 diabetes   sexual health   sleep   view health a-z   ×   top health categories   coronavirus disease covid-19   gastrointestinal health   allergies   heart disease   alzheimer's & dementia   high blood pressure   arthritis & rheumatology   lung cancer   breast cancer   pregnancy   cold, flu & cough   type 1 diabetes   depression   type 2 diabetes   diet & nutrition   sexual health   eating disorders   sleep   eye health   view health a-z   medical home   life sciences home   about   news   life sciences a-z   white papers   lab equipment   interviews   newsletters   webinars   more...   contact   meet the team   advertise   search   white papers   mediknowledge   newsletters   health & personal care   contact   meet the team   advertise   search   webinars   contact   meet the team   advertise   search   menu   forensic applications of fluorescent microscopy   download   pdf copy   by   benedette cuffari, m.sc.   the integration of fluorescent labeling with advanced microscopy techniques has enhanced forensic science investigations and research.   image credit: micha weber / shutterstock.com   how is microscopy used in forensics?   a forensic investigation on determining the cause of death often depends upon the analysis of the evidence of the time since death, otherwise known as the postmortem interval (pmi).   while several macroscopic observations can be utilized to determine the pmi, microscopy techniques, particularly electron microscopy (em), can provide more accurate pmi estimates. for example, em has successfully been used to study morphological alterations in human nerves to assess what stage of myelin degradation has occurred.   several subtypes of em like transmission electron microscopy (tem) have also been used to provide information on the cause of death. more specifically, tem has been used to detect ultrastructural changes in the myocardium and study alterations in skin morphology and mentalization that resulted from suspected cases of electrocution.   in addition to em, atomic force microscopy (afm) has also been used for several different forensic investigation applications. some examples include the characterization of surfaces with potential fingermark deposits, trace evidence analysis of gunshot residues (gsr) and the evaluation of shooting distance.   applications of fluorescent microscopy   fluorescent microscopy is associated with several advantageous properties that make it an ideal tool for forensic researchers. fluorescent microscopy techniques have been widely used within forensic science to assist in the visualization of latent fingerprints, identification of gsr and examination of other types of trace evidence.   latent fingerprints   fingerprints are the unique identities of each individual and do not change as an individual gets older, thereby making this type of forensic evidence extremely powerful during criminal investigations. in addition to identifying individuals present at a crime scene, fingerprint analysis is also crucial to preventing and detecting counterfeiting.   since fingerprints are often invisible to the naked eye, additional efforts by forensic investigators are required to develop and ultimately allow for the visualization of latent fingerprints (lfps). several traditional methods that can be used for the development of lfps include powder dusting, ninhydrin spraying and cyanoacrylate fuming, many of which are simple and effective methods.   despite their ease of use, many of these methods are associated with high contrast and low background interference, both of which can cause challenges in the accurate visualization of lfps.   the unique fluorescent properties of several different nanomaterials have led many researchers to incorporate these materials into lfp detection. quantum dots (qds), for example, are associated with both exceptional fluorescence intensity capabilities and a large stokes shift, both of which allow for an enhanced contrast of lfps when irradiated by ultraviolet (uv) visible light.   due to the fluorescent label potential of lanthanide phosphors, recent work on this material has led to the fabrication of red-emitting la   2   (moo   4   )   3   :eu   3+   phosphor microcrystals for the visualization of lfps deposited onto several different nonporous substrates. some of the unique characteristics of this novel material include high contrast and low background interference, both of which contribute to the ability of this label to provide well-defined finger ridge details when analyzed by sem.   another type of fluorescent label that has been coupled with sem and tem include a red and green-emitting cdsio   3   :tb   3+   /eu   3+   nanopowder, which was fabricated by cetrimonium bromide (ctab) assisted sonochemical processes. the choice to incorporate rare earth elements like eu   3+   and tb   3+   into this nanopowder was largely due to the capabilities of these ions to emit in the red and green regions, respectively, of the electromagnetic spectrum.   this novel nanopowder is also equipped with silicates, which, due to their stable crystal structure, strong absorption within the near-uv region and impressive long-term durability properties, also enhances its luminescent characteristics.   this novel nanopowder was found to be highly sensitivity and efficient, as well as prevent background hindrance during the microscopic evaluation of fingerprints on various porous and nonporous surfaces ranging from aluminum foil and glass bottles to a teacup and currency note.   gsr   after a firearm has been discharged, the bullet exits the weapon, which causes a mixture of both gaseous and fine particulate matter to be emitted. taken together, the residue from the primer which ignites the main propellant, as well as any material lost from the bullet and the barrel, can be referred to as gsr or, in more general terms, firearms discharge residue (fdr). some of the traditional methods for analyzing gsr include the griess test, which can be used to measure nitrates and sodium rhodizonate for lead; however, these tests are often insufficient in their ability to identify multiple elements with individual particles and are not specific to gsr.   the combined approach of sem with energy dispersive x-ray spectrometry (sem-edx) is a powerful tool that has been used by forensic investigators to detect gsr. some research has found that incorporating fluorescent lanthanide taggants during ammunition type analyses can assist in sem-edx identification. in addition to being used to enhance microscopic evaluation from collected evidence, this type of taggant can also be integrated into monochromated light sources and viewing filters during the initial screening for gsr at the crime scene.   references and further reading   jones, b. j. (2019). microscopy in forensic sciences. in:   springer handbook of microscopy.   1507-1524.   doi:10.1007/978-3-030-00069-1_32.   li, f., liu, s., qi, r.,   et al.   (2017). effective visualization of latent fingerprints with red fluorescent la   2   (moo   4   )   3   :eu   3+   microcrystals.   journal of alloys and compounds 727   ; 919-924.   doi:10.1016/j.jallcom.2017.08.182.   basavaraj, r. b., nagabhushana, h., darshan, g. p.,   et al.   (2017). red and green emitting ctab assisted cdsio   3   :tb   3+   /eu   3+   nanpowders as fluorescent labeling agents used in forensic and display applications.   dyes and pigments 147   ; 346-377.   doi:10.1016/j.dyepig.2017.08.011.   further reading   all forensics content   epigenetics and forensics   chromatography in forensic science   overcoming dna degradation in forensic science   reducing pcr inhibition in forensic science   more...   last updated: dec 14, 2020   written by   benedette cuffari   after completing her bachelor of science in toxicology with two minors in spanish and chemistry in 2016, benedette continued her studies to complete her master of science in toxicology in may of 2018. 

 during graduate school, benedette investigated the dermatotoxicity of mechlorethamine and bendamustine; two nitrogen mustard alkylating agents that are used in anticancer therapy.   download   pdf copy   read in:   english   español   français   português   italiano   citations   please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   apa   cuffari, benedette. (2020, december 14). forensic applications of fluorescent microscopy. news-medical. retrieved on february 20, 2021 from https://www.news-medical.net/life-sciences/forensic-applications-of-fluorescent-microscopy.aspx.   mla   cuffari, benedette. "forensic applications of fluorescent microscopy".   news-medical   . 20 february 2021. <https://www.news-medical.net/life-sciences/forensic-applications-of-fluorescent-microscopy.aspx>.   chicago   cuffari, benedette. "forensic applications of fluorescent microscopy". news-medical. https://www.news-medical.net/life-sciences/forensic-applications-of-fluorescent-microscopy.aspx. (accessed february 20, 2021).   harvard   cuffari, benedette. 2020.   forensic applications of fluorescent microscopy   . news-medical, viewed 20 february 2021, https://www.news-medical.net/life-sciences/forensic-applications-of-fluorescent-microscopy.aspx.   comments   the opinions expressed here are the views of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the views and opinions of news medical.   cancel reply to comment   post a new comment   login   (logout)   post   trending   stories   latest   interviews   top life sciences articles   novel finding could lead to better treatments for type 1 and type 2 diabetes   study: all monogamous mammals are not 'wired for love' in the same way   major antioxidant in green tea may increase levels of natural anti-cancer protein   genetic variant inherited from neanderthals associated with protection against severe covid-19   scientists study how a single gene alteration may have separated modern humans from extinct hominins   climate change may have contributed to the covid-19 pandemic   dr. robert beyer   in this interview, news-medical speaks to dr. robert beyer about his latest research that discovered that climate change may have contributed to the covid-19 pandemic.   are antibody cocktails the key to covid-19 treatment?   dr. natalia freund   news-medical speaks to dr. natalia freund about her latest research into covid-19, and how most people are capable of producing neutralizing antibodies against the virus.   promising nanobodies against covid-19 produced by llamas   dr. david brody   news-medical speaks to dr. david brody about his latest research that involved discovering nanobodies produced by llamas that could help combat coronavirus.   how is sustainability incorporated into pharmaceutical packaging?   biochemical tests for microbial identification   dermasensors: the future of skin cancer detection   the importance of pharmaceutical packaging in different applications   what standards ensure the quality of pharmaceutical packaging?   latest life science news   developing biochemically sensitive membranes with electrochemistry   plant breeding can help increase crop productivity, reduce human malnutrition   mobile voc monitor ptr-tof qb deployed to map spoke plume   mutant spike proteins & antigens for sars-cov-2 variant research   researchers discover method to synthesize useful and unique compounds   newsletters you may be   interested in   autism   (   subscribe or preview   )   medical device   (   subscribe or preview   )   infectious diseases   (   subscribe or preview   )   see all newsletters »   medical links   medical home   covid-19   news   health a-z   white papers   thought leaders   insights   mediknowledge series   health & personal care   medical devices   drugs   life sciences links   life sciences home   news   lab instruments & equipment   life sciences a-z   white papers   thought leaders   insights   webinars   other useful links   about   meet the team   search   newsletters   sitemap   advertise   contact   update your privacy preferences   terms & conditions   privacy & cookie policy   facebook   twitter   news-medical.net provides this medical information service in accordance
                                                with these   terms and conditions   .
                                                please note that medical information found
                                                on this website is designed to support, not to replace the relationship
                                                between patient and physician/doctor and the medical advice they may provide.   this site complies with the   honcode standard for trustworthy health   information:   verify here.   news-medical.net - an azonetwork site   owned and operated by azonetwork, © 2000-2021   we use cookies to enhance your experience. by continuing to browse this site you agree to our use of cookies.   more info   .   accept   cookie settings   